so if we're going to use a database in
our programs it's important to
understand what a database is now a
database is just an organized collection
of data that can be used to store
information on a computer or on an
Android device or accessed from a web
server over the Internet
now if you have used an android phone or tablet and
if you're watching this as part of my
android course and you certainly will
have android itself uses many databases
to store things like your contact info
text messages and also your browser
history now search history on a browser
is also stored in the database which is
how the Google search on you're phone
knows what you've searched previously
and can offer suggestions
anything that stores and retrieves
information can be called a database
these days and the term database
is normally used to refer to more
structured data vendors such as
Microsoft oracle and IBM produced
database management systems based on a
relational database the data is stored
in rows and columns with a row
corresponding to a single record and the
columns representing the fields that
make up a record such as name address
and date of birth in the case of a
person's record or stock number
description and quantity in a stock keeping
application so there's a huge number of
database systems out there probably the
most well-known of the traditional
databases being microsoft sql sequel server
oracle and db2 from IBM now Oracle own
the Java language after buying sun
micro systems but they were originally
created as a database company
so these traditional databases typically
use structured query language shorten to
sql or SQL for performing operations
such as querying and updating the data
but there is now a growing interest in
no sql databases used for storing and
processing big data android includes a
public domain database engine called
sql lite and python includes
support for sql lite databases in the
standard library unlike traditional
database management systems such a
sql server or oracle sql lite is
completely self-contained doesn't
actually need a separate server to run
on
sql lite was designed to be embedded
into systems and originally missile
guidance systems in fact now it uses
the sql language which makes it very
easy to use if you already know a bit
about databases that means that you can
move on to use other sql databases
once you've learned to use sql lite now
sql was developed from Edgar F
Codsworth on relational databases in
the nineteen seventies and became an
ansi standard in 1986 sql lite
implements most of the features of
sql 92 and although they've been 4
revisions of the standard since sql 92 includes everything needed for most
database tasks and interestingly text
messages on iphone are also stored in a
sql lite database
so if you're freaking out about know
of the prospect of having to learn yet
another language don't worry sql
is a language but it's nowhere near as
complicated as java for example in fact
you can do a lot of database work with
only 4 commands select insert update
and delete and you'll see those in there
this section of the course as we work
forward now if you're going to be doing
a lot of database work then you will
need to learn sql more fully than
what we need here and you'll also need
to learn about things like normalization
but the basics that i'm going to cover
will allow you to create programs that
can do basic storage update and retrieval of
information in a database
sql lite has been around since 2008
is a very fast and very stable
standalone database in fact it's the
most widely deployed database engine in
the world is actually close to being the
most widely deployed piece of software
of any kind which is pretty impressive
examples of its use and justification
for that claim that it's the most widely
deployed database engine in the world
are at sqllite.org/mostdeployed.HTML interesting read if you've got
the time and you can also find out more
information about sql lite at that
website click the sql lite logo at
the top of the page to go to the
homepage you can just go to sqllite
.org or you can just type in sql lite
.org / index.html either way it will get you their
alright we're going to first look at
some basic database terminology and
then we are going to move on to use sql lite to create a database and store some
information in that database we need to
understand things like table records and
fields as well as record sets and why
they're important so we'll start by
looking at database terminology in the
next video